RNN (Recurrent Neural Network)

Q)why RNN was invented?
A)Traditional Neural Networks cannot remember previous info. that's why we have invented RNN.
ex: I grew in France, I speak fluent _________ it need to predict French
Normal neural networks process the input independently but language depends on the previous info.

Q)What is RNN?
A) RNN is a neural network designed for sequential data.
Applications:
language,speech,stock prediction.

Formula: h_t =tanh(W_h h_{t-1} + W_x x_t)

problem with RNN:
vanishing gradient(earlier whole influence disappear)
long-term dependency problem

LSTM(Long Short Term Memory)
it is designed to remember long-term info.
ex: how u remember ur name,school,birthday because ur brain decides what to remember and what to forget.
LSTM is same it remembers few and forgets few
LSTM have 3 gates:
1. forget gate: decides what to remove from memory.
ex: I live in hyd now I previously lived in delhi, it forgets the delhi
2. input gate: decides what new info. to store.
ex:today is raining, it will store raining
3. output gate:decide what to set as output.

Why LSTM works better than RNN?
1.memory
2.gradient - rnn vanishes, lstm reaches tables
3.Accuracy

GRU(Gated Recurrent Unit):
it is a simplified version LSTM
instead of 3 gates we have only 2 gates:
Update gate: controls how much fast the info. to keep
Reset gate: how much fast the info. to forget

Bidirectional RNN:
Normal RNN reads text from left to right
ex: i went to the bank to deposit money
model reads the sequences in both directions
1.forward
2. backward

Why bidirectional is useful?
ex: HE went to bank to withdraw money
he went to the bank in forward pass
withdraw money in backward pass
now bank=financial bank not river bank

*Encoder, Decoder is used in sequence to sequence task
Encoder, decoder inside lstm, gru will be there
ex: machine translator

Encoder: it reads the entire input in sequence
ex:i love ML, encoder converts that particular input into context vector
this vector contains the meaning of the context

Decoder: it generates output sequence from the context vector

Problem: context vector compresses the entire sentences into 1 single vector
for long sentences info. will lose
Solution: attention mechanism,(imp) transformation works in attention mechanism

Self Attention:
it allows a model to *focus on imp words in a sentence*
ex: the animals unable to cross the stream because it was too tired
self attention calculates imp bw the words

How self attention works?
Query = what im looking for
Key = what do I contain
Value = actual info.
attention score= query * key
ex: a dog chased cat because it was hungry, here it - dog
attention tells dog is more imp than the cat

Model	Strength	Weaknesses
RNN	it is a simple	forget the long context
LSTM	long memory	it is complex
GRU	faster	slightly it is more expensive
Bidirectional		slow
Encoder Decoder	sequence to sequence task	context bottleneck(forgets the imp of long)
Self Attention	global context	high compute
